1: Mol Biol Cell  2002 Mar;13(3):854-65 

Endoplasmic reticulum dynamics, inheritance, and cytoskeletal interactions in
budding yeast.

Fehrenbacher KL, Davis D, Wu M, Boldogh I, Pon LA.

Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Columbia University, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae consists of a
reticulum underlying the plasma membrane (cortical ER) and ER associated with
the nuclear envelope (nuclear ER). We used a Sec63p-green fluorescent protein
fusion protein to study motility events associated with inheritance of cortical
ER and nuclear ER in living yeast cells. During M phase before nuclear
migration, we observed thick, apparently rigid tubular extensions emanating from
the nuclear ER that elongate, undergo sweeping motions along the cell cortex,
and shorten. Two findings support a role for microtubules in this process.
First, extension of tubular structures from the nuclear ER is inhibited by
destabilization of microtubules. Second, astral microtubules, structures that
undergo similar patterns of extension, cortical surveillance and retraction,
colocalize with nuclear ER extensions. During S and G(2) phases of the cell
cycle, we observed anchorage of the cortical ER at the site of bud emergence and
apical bud growth. Thin tubules of the ER that extend from the anchored cortical
ER display undulating, apparently random movement and move into the bud as it
grows. Finally, we found that cortical ER morphology is sensitive to a
filamentous actin-destabilizing drug, latrunculin-A, and to mutations in the
actin-encoding ACT1 gene. Our observations support 1) different mechanisms and
cytoskeletal mediators for the inheritance of nuclear and cortical ER elements
and 2) a mechanism for cortical ER inheritance that is cytoskeleton dependent
but relies on anchorage, not directed movement.

PMID: 11907267 [PubMed - in process]



2: Genetics  2002 Mar;160(3):923-34 

The Novel Adaptor Protein, Mti1p, and Vrp1p, a Homolog of Wiskott-Aldrich
Syndrome Protein-Interacting Protein (WIP), May Antagonistically Regulate Type I
Myosins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Mochida J, Yamamoto T, Fujimura-Kamada K, Tanaka K.

Division of Molecular Interaction, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Hokkaido, 060-0815, Japan.

Type I myosins in yeast, Myo3p and Myo5p (Myo3/5p), are involved in the
reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. The SH3 domain of Myo5p regulates the
polymerization of actin through interactions with both Las17p, a homolog of
mammalian Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP), and Vrp1p, a homolog of
WASP-interacting protein (WIP). Vrp1p is required for both the localization of
Myo5p to cortical patch-like structures and the ATP-independent interaction
between the Myo5p tail region and actin filaments. We have identified and
characterized a new adaptor protein, Mti1p (Myosin tail region-interacting
protein), which interacts with the SH3 domains of Myo3/5p. Mti1p
co-immunoprecipitated with Myo5p and Mti1p-GFP co-localized with cortical actin
patches. A null mutation of MTI1 exhibited synthetic lethal phenotypes with
mutations in SAC6 and SLA2, which encode actin-bundling and cortical
actin-binding proteins, respectively. Although the mti1 null mutation alone did
not display any obvious phenotype, it suppressed vrp1 mutation phenotypes,
including temperature-sensitive growth, abnormally large cell morphology,
defects in endocytosis and salt-sensitive growth. These results suggest that
Mti1p and Vrp1p antagonistically regulate type I myosin functions.

PMID: 11901111 [PubMed - in process]



3: J Mol Biol  2002 Mar 8;316(5):1071-81 

Mechanistic Implications for Escherichia coli Cofactor-dependent
Phosphoglycerate Mutase Based on the High-resolution Crystal Structure of a
Vanadate Complex.

Bond CS, White MF, Hunter WN.

Division of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Microbiology, Wellcome Trust
Biocentre, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK

The structure of Escherichia coli cofactor-dependent phosphoglycerate mutase
(dPGM), complexed with the potent inhibitor vanadate, has been determined to a
resolution of 1.30A (R-factor 0.159; R-free 0.213). The inhibitor is present in
the active site, principally as divanadate, but with evidence of additional
vanadate moieties at either end, and representing a different binding mode to
that observed in the structural homologue prostatic acid phosphatase. The
analysis reveals the enzyme-ligand interactions involved in inhibition of the
mutase activity by vanadate and identifies a water molecule, observed in the
native E.coli dPGM structure which, once activated by vanadate, may
dephosphorylate the active protein. Rather than reflecting the active
conformation previously observed for E.coli dPGM, the inhibited protein's
conformation resembles that of the inactive dephosphorylated Saccharomyces
cerevisiae dPGM. The provision of a high-resolution structure of both active and
inactive forms of dPGM from a single organism, in conjunction with computational
modelling of substrate molecules in the active site provides insight into the
binding of substrates and the specific interactions necessary for three
different activities, mutase, synthase and phosphatase, within a single active
site. The sequence similarity of E.coli and human dPGMs allows us to correlate
stucture with clinical pathology. Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 11884145 [PubMed - in process]



4: J Mol Biol  2002 Mar 1;316(4):955-68 

Implications for the Ubiquitination Reaction of the Anaphase-promoting Complex
from the Crystal Structure of the Doc1/Apc10 Subunit.

Au SW, Leng X, Harper JW, Barford D.

Section of Structural Biology, Chester Beatty Laboratories, Institute of Cancer
Research, 237 Fulham Road, London, SW3 6JB, UK

The anaphase-promoting complex (APC) is a multi-subunit E3 protein ubiquitin
ligase that is responsible for the metaphase to anaphase transition and the exit
from mitosis. One of the subunits of the APC that is required for its
ubiquitination activity is Doc1/Apc10, a protein composed of a Doc1 homology
domain that has been identified in a number of diverse putative E3 ubiquitin
ligases. Here, we present the crystal structure of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Doc1/Apc10 at 2.2A resolution. The Doc1 homology domain forms a beta-sandwich
structure that is related in architecture to the galactose-binding domain of
galactose oxidase, the coagulation factor C2 domain and a domain of XRCC1.
Residues that are invariant amongst Doc1/Apc10 sequences, including a
temperature-sensitive mitotic arrest mutant, map to a beta-sheet region of the
molecule, whose counterpart in galactose oxidase, the coagulation factor C2
domains and XRCC1, mediate bio-molecular interactions. This finding suggests the
identification of the functionally important and conserved region of Doc1/Apc10
and, since invariant residues of Doc1/Apc10 colocalise with conserved residues
of other Doc1 homology domains, we propose that the Doc1 homology domains
perform common ubiquitination functions in the APC and other E3 ubiquitin
ligases. Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 11884135 [PubMed - in process]



5: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  2002 Mar 5;99(5):2684-9 

Interactions among the protein and RNA subunits of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
nuclear RNase P.

Houser-Scott F, Xiao S, Millikin CE, Zengel JM, Lindahl L, Engelke DR.

Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0606; and Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Maryland--Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD 21250.

Ribonuclease P (RNase P) is a ubiquitous endoribonuclease that cleaves precursor
tRNAs to generate mature 5prime prime or minute termini. Although RNase P from
all kingdoms of life have been found to have essential RNA subunits, the number
and size of the protein subunits ranges from one small protein in bacteria to at
least nine proteins of up to 100 kDa. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae nuclear RNase
P, the enzyme is composed of ten subunits: a single RNA and nine essential
proteins. The spatial organization of these components within the enzyme is not
yet understood. In this study we examine the likely binary protein--protein and
protein--RNA subunit interactions by using directed two- and three-hybrid tests
in yeast. Only two protein subunits, Pop1p and Pop4p, specifically bind the RNA
subunit. Pop4p also interacted with seven of the other eight protein subunits.
The remaining protein subunits all showed one or more specific protein--protein
interactions with the other integral protein subunits. Of particular interest
was the behavior of Rpr2p, the only protein subunit found in RNase P but not in
the closely related enzyme, RNase MRP. Rpr2p interacts strongly with itself as
well as with Pop4p. Similar interactions with self and Pop4p were also detected
for Snm1p, the only unique protein subunit so far identified in RNase MRP. This
observation is consistent with Snm1p and Rpr2p serving analogous functions in
the two enzymes. This study provides a low-resolution map of the multisubunit
architecture of the ribonucleoprotein enzyme, nuclear RNase P from S.
cerevisiae.

PMID: 11880623 [PubMed - in process]



6: Mol Cell Biol  2002 Mar;22(6):1615-25 

Transcription activator interactions with multiple SWI/SNF subunits.

Neely KE, Hassan AH, Brown CE, Howe L, Workman JL.

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

We have previously shown that the yeast SWI/SNF complex stimulates in vitro
transcription from chromatin templates in an ATP-dependent manner. SWI/SNF
function in this regard requires the presence of an activator with which it can
interact directly, linking activator recruitment of SWI/SNF to transcriptional
stimulation. In this study, we determine the SWI/SNF subunits that mediate its
interaction with activators. Using a photo-cross-linking label transfer
strategy, we show that the Snf5, Swi1, and Swi2/Snf2 subunits are contacted by
the yeast acidic activators, Gcn4 and Hap4, in the context of the intact native
SWI/SNF complex. In addition, we show that the same three subunits can interact
individually with acidic activation domains, indicating that each subunit
contributes to binding activators. Furthermore, mutations that reduce the
activation potential of these activators also diminish its interaction with each
of these SWI/SNF subunits. Thus, three distinct subunits of the SWI/SNF complex
contribute to its interactions with activation domains.

PMID: 11865042 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



7: J Mol Biol  2001 Nov 30;314(3):563-75 

Solution structures of two FHA1-phosphothreonine peptide complexes provide
insight into the structural basis of the ligand specificity of FHA1 from yeast
Rad53.

Yuan C, Yongkiettrakul S, Byeon IJ, Zhou S, Tsai MD.

Department of Chemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus OH 43210, USA.

Rad53, a yeast checkpoint protein involved in regulating the repair of DNA
damage, contains two forkhead-associated domains, FHA1 and FHA2. Previous
combinatorial library screening has shown that FHA1 strongly selects peptides
containing a pTXXD motif. Subsequent location of this motif within the sequence
of Rad9, the target protein, coupled with spectroscopic analysis has led to
identification of a tight binding sequence that is likely the binding site of
FHA1: (188)SLEV(pT)EADATFVQ(200). We present solution structures of FHA1 in
complex with this pT-peptide and with another Rad9-derived pT-peptide that has
ca 30-fold lower affinity, (148)KKMTFQ(pT)PTDPLE(160). Both complexes showed
intermolecular NOEs predominantly between three peptide residues (pT, +1, and +2
residues) and five FHA1 residues (S82, R83, S85, T106, and N107). Furthermore,
the following interactions were implicated on the basis of chemical shift
perturbations and structural analysis: the phosphate group of the pT residue
with the side-chain amide group of N86 and the guanidino group of R70, and the
carboxylate group of Asp (at the +3 position) with the guanidino group of R83.
The generated structures revealed a similar binding mode adopted by these two
peptides, suggesting that pT and the +3 residue Asp are the major contributors
to binding affinity and specificity, while +1 and +2 residues could provide
additional fine-tuning. It was also shown that FHA1 does not bind to the
corresponding pS-peptides or a related pY-peptide. We suggest that
differentiation between pT and pS-peptides by FHA1 can be attributed to
hydrophobic interactions between the methyl group of the pT residue and the
aliphatic protons of R83, S85, and T106 from FHA1. Copyright 2001 Academic
Press.

PMID: 11846567 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



8: Nucleic Acids Res  2002 Feb 15;30(4):1029-37 

Functional and physical interactions between components of the Prp19p-associated
complex.

Chen CH, Yu WC, Tsao TY, Wang LY, Chen HR, Lin JY, Tsai WY, Cheng SC.

Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

The Prp19p-associated complex is essential for the yeast pre-mRNA splicing
reaction. The complex consists of at least eight protein components, but is not
tightly associated with spliceosomal snRNAs. By a combination of genetic and
biochemical methods we previously identified four components of this complex,
Ntc25p, Ntc85p, Ntc30p and Ntc20p, all of them being novel splicing factors. We
have now identified three other components of the complex, Ntc90p, Ntc77p and
Ntc31p. These three proteins were also associated with the spliceosome during
the splicing reaction in the same manner as Prp19p, concurrently with or
immediately after dissociation of U4 snRNA. Two-hybrid analysis revealed that
none of these proteins interacted with Prp19p or Ntc25p, but all interacted with
Ntc85p. An interaction network between the identified components of the
Prp19p-associated complex is demonstrated. Biochemical analysis revealed that
Ntc90p, Ntc31p, Ntc30p and Ntc20p form a subcomplex, which, through interacting
with Ntc85p and Ntc77p, can associate with Prp19p and Ntc25p to form the
Prp19p-associated complex. Genetic analysis suggests that Ntc31p, Ntc30p and
Ntc20p may play roles in modulating the function of Ntc90p.

PMID: 11842115 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



9: Biochemistry  2002 Feb 19;41(7):2409-20 

Novel interactions of Saccharomyces cerevisiae type 1 protein phosphatase
identified by single-step affinity purification and mass spectrometry.

Walsh EP, Lamont DJ, Beattie KA, Stark MJ.

School of Life Sciences Biocentre, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.

The catalytic subunit of Saccharomyces cerevisiae type 1 protein phosphatase
(PP1(C)) is encoded by the essential gene GLC7 and is involved in regulating
diverse cellular processes. To identify potential regulatory or targeting
subunits of yeast PP1(C), we tagged Glc7p at its amino terminus with protein A
and affinity-purified Glc7p protein complexes from yeast. The purified proteins
were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) and identified by peptide mass fingerprint analysis using
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry. To
confirm the accuracy of our identifications, peptides from some of the proteins
were also sequenced using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled
to tandem mass spectrometry. Only four of the Glc7p-associated proteins that we
identified (Mhp1p, Bni4p, Ref2p, and Sds22p) have previously been shown to
interact with Glc7p, and multiple components of the CPF (cleavage and
polyadenylation factor) complex involved in messenger RNA 3'-end processing were
present as major components in the Glc7p-associated protein fraction. To confirm
the interaction of Glc7p with this complex, we used the same approach to purify
and characterize the components of the yeast CPF complex using protein A-tagged
Pta1p. Six known components of the yeast (CPF) complex, together with Glc7p,
were identified among the Pta1p-associated polypeptides using peptide mass
fingerprint analysis. Thus Glc7p is a novel component of the CPF complex and may
therefore be involved regulating mRNA 3'-end processing.

PMID: 11841235 [PubMed - in process]



10: Biotechnol Prog  2002 Jan-Feb;18(1):116-23 

Recovery of recombinant cutinase using detergent foam.

Fernandes S, Mattiasson B, Hatti-Kaul R.

Department of Biotechnology, Center for Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, Lund
University, P.O. Box 124, S-221 00 Lund, Sweden.

Foam generated by vigorous stirring of a nonionic detergent, Triton X-114, was
used for the recovery of recombinant cutinase expressed by Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. The enzyme with a hydrophobic fusion tag, (Trp-Pro)(4), was
recovered with a higher yield as compared to the wild-type cutinase, indicating
the involvement of hydrophobic interactions in protein isolation with the foam.
The influence of various factors including volume, dilution, pH, different
additives, and cell concentration in the medium on enzyme recovery was
investigated. Interaction of the enzyme with detergent was monitored using
fluorescence spectroscopy. No significant changes in protein conformation after
the isolation procedure were observed using circular dichroism.

PMID: 11822909 [PubMed - in process]

